---
layout: post
title: prototype
---

# The Butterfly Defect
Against the encircling chaos of wayward dirt paths and mismanaged infrastructure, which had come into existence piecemeal, every piece in a violent hurry for some one man’s purpose, emerges purposeful rectilinear urban blocks. Upon closer inspection one uncovers the underlying (both in the literal and figurative sense) beat of the heart that this township drums along to just few miles south of these blocks. A topography of open wounds Peppering the barren lunarlike topography standing flat as mesas that betrays the scope of mankind’s uneasy and conflicted relationship with nature. The story of coal. Upon closer inspection one would witness 2600 ton of German engineering ingurgitating through the lignite seams imported from the Soviet Union under Indo-Soviet assistance programme. This remote hamlet in today occupies a pre-dominant place in the industrial and power map of India. As a microcosm of the wider metabolism of our contemporary society the fossil fuels have hijacked and staged an upheaval. Second only in importance to those whom plough the land.
at the heart of the labyrinth of narrow courts upon courts, and close streets upon streets,
Proton gradients symbiosis and the ecosystem
Bioenergetics and the birth  Sturm un Drang
"You ask Multivac. I dare you. Five dollars says it can't be done." The Last Question by Isaac Asimov

Entropy, as stated in the Second Law of Thermodynamics, is a measurement of the instinctive state of highly disordered equilibrium toward which energy tends. In a closed system the availability of useful energy can only decline. A lump of coal is a high quality highly ordered form of energy which upon combustion will produce heat a dispersed disordered form of energy. To reverse this sequence is brain-bendingly impossible as the products for such a reaction cannot be reconstituted back into a lump of coal. Ice cubes melting. Hopelessly attempting to write non-messy software. And the Iran Nuclear Deal. In every sequence of events that looks weird if we ran it in reverse we notice this universal tendency playing out. Thus, the creationist would lead you believe that such elegant creatures like pterodactyls, iguanas or humans couldn’t arise without the Grace of the Lord. You are after all a being of highly intricate structure and complexity. If I threw all your rich organic matter into a giant fruit blender, there are a far greater number of possible arrangements of the end states of the system in which it resembles a gooey sludge rather than that of assuming a humanoid form. The caveat that enables our local system to derive such order from the theatrical thermodynamic chaos of the universe is an entirely one sided cosmic trade deal.
The entire becoming of the cosmos is defined by the gradual unraveling of disorder. A halting and subsequent leaping of entropic growth which is neither expeditious nor uniform. Vast regions of matter and energy may remain for prolonged periods trapped in configurations of local stability and order till there too channels for such growth open. An unopened dam in the mountains. A primordial nebula of contracting hydrogen. Yugoslavia. All states are merely transitory bound to be distant memories drowned out by the inexorable dance of time.
Our import driven planetary energy economy derives nearly all its energy from low entropy photons born in the fiery crucible that is the Sun’s core from proton-proton reaction Our biosphere as an open system incessantly imports the continuous flow of solar energy, which arrives at our planet’s upper atmosphere at rates of about 174 petawatts.  Vast sectors of our global ecosystem are built on the foundation of the photosynthetic capture of this immense energy flow along with its subsequent conversion and distribution so as to build and maintain the greater order, organization and structure of the biosphere. Life in all its richness and splendor is not in violation of this universality but was instead born to it.
From a thermodynamic perspective, life can be described as a ‘dissipative structure’ driven by an energy gradient that increases the entropy of its surroundings. Despite the energy cost of storing and utilizing information, natural selection selects the fittest. Environmental perturbation generates a signal that initiates a corrective response. Systems that fail to do this are rapidly eliminated by natural selection. A sort of pre-biological Darwinism.
Before we get to that we are to take a small detour into the eye of a hurricane. we pump protons across the membrane, and most of them return through proteins that behave as turbines, driving work. In the case of the ATP synthase, the flow of protons through this nanoscopic rotating motor drives ATP synthesis. But note that this whole system depends on active pumping. Block the pumps and everything grinds to a halt. Alan Turing in the tragic epilogue of his life bit into an apple laced with cyanide and thats exactly what cyanide does. It inhibits the very last enzyme in the respiratory electron transport chain of the mitochondria like a clog in the ATP synthase toilet bowl. Proton concentrations equilibrate across the membrane and net flow of free energy sputters to a halt. The irrevocable collapse of membranes potential appears to be the most poetic way to transition from life to death.
Stable systems respond to perturbations in ways that nullify or reduce their disequilibrium effects by means of negative feedback assuring variations within systems do not exceed a certain homeostatic plateau. On
exuberant agitation
https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/WEO_2017_Executive_Summary_English_version.pdf
although we know for a fact that energy is conserved, the energy available for human utility is not conserved so easily. The laws which govern how much energy is available
Human and energy agriculture to civilization dichotomies of ideology
Complex arrangements of matter persist through the passing of time only if they are able to capture free energy from their environment and put it to work, and humans and their societies are no exceptions. History acts in unpredictably wonky ways however the  structure and dynamics of its organizations  have always grown in accord to its most elementary energetic components.  Every dimension of social development is delimited
For all the enchantment of pre-industrial agrarian history from fabulous pharaohs to marauding Mongols, the fundamentals and immutability of the basic units of energy capture for human utility remained the same.
Agriculture makes for surplus and thus almost inevitably the unequal distribution of surplus, generating socioeconomic schisms in status that dwarf anything any other primates could cook up with their hierarchies. Sadly, even hunter gatherers of yesteryear enjoyed shorter hours and lived longer healthier lives. From the coastal provinces of China to northwestern Europe agricultural yields approached the boundaries of maximal rates of natural energy flux and flows that one can exploit for human utility. Agrarian societies were caught in Malthusian traps: geometric population growth outpaced arithmetic growth in the food supply, driving the per capita food supply back down toward bare subsistence. Traditional agriculture employed in excess of 80% of the populace. For nearly two thousand years, agrarian empires pressed against this ceiling without breaking it. From the coastal provinces of China to northwestern Europe agricultural yields approached the boundaries of maximal rates of natural energy flux and flows that one can exploit for human utility.  Vast swaths of the population lived off nothing more than basic subsistence diets even on good years of harvest and the uncertainty and the unpredictability of these flows often resulted in widespread malnutrition and massive famines. Monotonous and inadequate diets remain mainstays even today in less developed countries where population densities per hectare of cultivated land have surpassed the limits sustainable for even the most intensive traditional farming regimes of the past. Only with the inputs of fossil energies direct as either electricity or fuel and indirectly through agrochemicals and machinery could one sustain both an expanding population and higher per capita supply of food

Both patterns of agricultural intensification either substitution of human labor by domesticated animal prime movers or increasing the productivity of labor inputs led to greater production and increasing population densities. Extensive irrigation systems such as the Sichuan’s Dujiangyan (that still feeds fields that supports millions of people more than 2 millenniums later) or Teotihuacan chinampas supported with the Aztec's complex irrigation and waterway systems called for unprecedented organizational capacities. Such systems require the meshing of large scale labour mobilization, long term planning, efficient logistics and simply put effective management.  Despite the  Maoist policies based on mass rural labor in communal farming continued the trend of progressively higher population densities supported by the assiduous cultivation and micromanagement of paddy agroecosystems. Even as late as the late 1970s, 800 million peasants continued to subsist on bare minimal rations albeit more equitably distributed.
The year 2008 marked a human milestone a transition point 9000 years in the making the first time majority of mankind lived in cities.
Natural selection operates as to increase the total mass of organic systems to increase the rate of circulation of matter through the system and to increase the state of energy in flux so long as there is are un or under utilized resources
The great divergence anthropogenic feedback loops
Energy security
Societies entered the new world of diversifying fossil fuel supply and the mass scale deployment of mechanical implements of movement.
Todays solar photovoltaic cells and wind turbines are embodiments of fossil energies required to smelt the requisite metals and synthesize essential platics and process other materials requiring high energy inputs
Deforestation was the price paid for producing everything from horseshoes to cannonballs. Iron smelting and limited domestic lumber led to a energy crisis in Britain. The bottleneck that energy was in traditional iron metallurgy specifically smelting was undeniable.   Only after wood resources were seriously depleted did, the epochal transition from biomass fuels get underway beginning in England.  The replacement of charcoal with metallurgical coke, the derivative of bituminous coal, would prove to be one the greatest technical innovations severing the unsustainable dependence of the iron smelting on wood and enable the massive scaling of operations. This would lay literally the foundations of modern civilization through the development of steel industry.
heralded the new age of classical thermodynamics but also—like Joseph William Turner’s magnificent pictorial combinations of sun, ocean, and steamships— deftly rendered into allegorical tales and pictures the industrial shift from a world of pulleys and harnesses to one consumed in the chaotic fury of heat engines. A new order of energy was thereby impressed within the public consciousness, transforming nineteenth-century Western culture and society.
Pre-hydrocarbon industrializing societies were energized by coal as well as by the generation of hydroelectricity. Coal would shape up to be the quintessential energy source of the 19th Century industrialization and continued to dominate the global supply of commercial energy during the first half of the 20th century. By the mid-seventeenth century, almost all the coalfields that later fueled English industrialization were already in operation and by 1700 the country was producing 3 million tons of coal a year. Consumption only really took off with the introduction of an efficient steam engine namely those patented in 1769 by James Watt. The engines original uses for pumping and lifting in mines would soon be outshined as it lay the energetic foundation of industrialization and urbanization. The affordable availability of such energetically concentrated power would come to redefine manufacturing productivity and long-distance land and marine transportation within a century. As such concentrated power elevated both productivity and mobility it heralded a new economic paradigm one predicated on growth.
 'I wish to God these calculations had been executed by steam' – Charles Babbage
Woah that’s odd. A potent force of the physical realm applied in a weightless one. Pistons would fire. Valves will open. And the abstract work of the mind will be done? To demonstrate this absurdity try asking fire benders to channel their chi to do math. Historically there had been tools , the Sumerian Abacus, the Chinese Suanpan
 However a new contender will enter the fray powered by a liquid whose dominant position in the energy map  The internal combustion engine
heat into motion. Once these innovations were unleashed, crude oil was prime to reconfigure the fundamental physics of the human condition. Its ascendancy as the indispensable and most politicized commodity of modern life powered the blitzekreig and Achilles heel of the axis powers. So desperate were the Nazi’s opened eastern theatre of war. Soviet counterattack. Post-World War II the world was extracting half a billion tonnes of oil per annum and by the turn of the 21 century this figure has increased more than 6-fold. A third of the world’s commercial energy and 90% of the world’s transport and energy needs are met by it (and 100% of commercial flight). Basic facts about the global oil business involve some very large aggregates. In 2016 global sale of just crude oil amounted to 1.2 trillion usd which is equivalent to 2% of world economic product. 5 of the world’s ten largest publicly listed companies were in the oil business.
No nation has ever understood the strategic imperative of oil better than the United States. Om the eve of the Second World War the Nazis the French the Italians had a woeful understanding of their impending oil crunch during wartime.  At the time the United States had been the leading source of German crude oil and its derivatives of lubricants and high-octane aviation fuel for the Luftwaffe. In the Eastern hemisphere nearly all Japan’s oil came from America or the distant Dutch East Indies till total oil embargo by Washington in retaliation to Manchuria.  Prior to the outbreak of World War II America had been the world’s largest producer and exporter of oil. Oil was one of the pillars of world power. American control of mideast oil would allow it to hold away over
China’s voracious appetite for energy
There is probably no greater testament to the innovative drive of the oil industry and the continual advances in geophysical surveys and exploratory drilling than
Irrationality of Energy
Shale gas revolution
Goldilocks’ Quagmire
Our planets atmosphere lets incoming radiation except for the shortest wavelengths reach the surfaces and warm them but absorbs temporarily part of the outgoing longwave radiation. Without this absorption the Earth would be a perfect black body radiator and re radiate all intercepted solar energy leaving the planet at a chilly -18*C. Atmospheric gases selectively absorb part of the outgoing radiation changing the planets average radiative temperature, Raising average mean surface temperature to 15*C. Fundamental metabolic pathway…
For a successful technology, reality must take precedence over public relations, for Nature cannot be fooled. - Richard P. Feynman
Atmospheric water vapor, the most important greenhouse gas, has several strong absorption bands; at wavelengths between 1 and 8 μm, it adds about 20K to the mean equilibrium surface temperature.
Trace (but critically important) concentrations of CO2 (accounting for about a quarter of the current natural greenhouse effect), methane, nitrous oxide and ozone increase the surface temperature
by more than 10 K. The greenhouse effect has been responsible for maintaining a relatively narrow range of biospheric temperatures for the past 3.5 billion years but water vapour, the main contributor, could not have been the key regulator, because its changing atmospheric concentrations amplify, rather than counteract, temperature changes: water evaporation declines with cooling, and increase with warming. The best explanation involves gradual feedbacks between atmospheric CO2, temperature, and the weathering
of silicate minerals: lower temperatures will bring decreased rates of silicate weathering and result in gradual accumulation of the released CO2—and subsequent warming. The key regulatory role
played by CO2 is the main reason for our concerns about relatively large anthropogenic increases of this gas, noticed since 1850. It is tempting to view this as some sort of a reverse-Atlas situation just as  the Greek Titan Atlas bore the weight of the World upon his shoulders, Earth bears the increasing weight of humanity upon its.
The coming reckoning and decentralization and devolution
“The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has created more massive and more colossal productive forces than have all preceding generations together. Subjection of Nature’s forces to man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry and agriculture, steam-navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of whole continents for cultivation, canalisation of rivers, whole populations conjured out of the ground – what earlier century had even a presentiment that such productive forces slumbered in the lap of social labour?” – Karl Marx
In the past, humanity has typically adopted energy sources that have greater“power density,” packing more punch per gram and requiring less land to produce. Renewables (green), however, are lower in density than fossil fuels (brown). That means a move to renewables could vastly increase the world’s energy production footprint, barring a vast expansion of nuclear power
The extent of future energy needs cannot be understood without realizing the extent of existing consumption disparities. The per capita annual energy consumption in North America is twice as high as in Europe or Japan more than 3 times as high as in China and more than 15 times greater than in India and more than 30 times as high as in the poorest countries in sub Saharan Africa. The enormous disparity is most impressively conveyed by contrasting continental shares of global population with their corresponding share of worldwide primary energy consumption – Africa with about 17% of the global population consumed about 4% of primary commercial energy in 2015 in a stunning reversal the U.S alone with about 4% of the worlds population claims 17% percent of worlds commercial energy. Because almost all the world’s population growth during the first half of the 21st century is set to take place in low and medium income countries most future increases in fossil fuel and electricity consumption will be in Asia and in Africa. To achieve a modicum of economic security the average annual per capital consumption rates
On a national and global levels the record shows the very opposite there is no doubt that higher efficiencies of energy conversions have led to steadily greater consumption of fuels and electricity. It is wholly a confusion of ideas to suppose that the economical use of fuels is equivalent to a diminished consumption. The very contrary is true. The now face and entirely new constraint of rapid global warming something that modernizing Europe, NA and Japan never had to worry about.
The long term decarbonization of the modern energy supply is already well underway but the progress will be gradual and we should not expect a large-scale transition to a hydrogen economy The hydrogen: carbon ratio of dominant fuels has moved from around 0.5 in the case of biomass to about 1 in coal and 1.8 for liquid hydrocarbons. The continuation of this trend points first to the emergence of natural gas of 4. Trends can be derailed or accelerated by social or political upheavals or enter frustrating cul de sac and only those that are strongly entrenched and rely on mature techniques have a high probability of continued adoption accompanied by further innovation.
First augmented and then progressive supplanted by renewables. Inexpensive intermittently generated electricity integrated into large grids and relying on considerable storage capacity can take over large shares of markets now served by fossil fuels.
Major inventions tend to come in irregularly spaced clusters rather than an orderly progression half a century is long enough to see the emergence and even substantial diffusion of several new inventions whose universal adoption could transform the energy foundations of civilization. The task ahead is a daunting one
Inimical
Ersatz myth
Morass
Elan
Mountebank charltans
Calumny
caryatid
If it’s any consolation, it will not be the first time in evolutionary history that the success of one life form has had the paradoxical effect of changing the global environment in ways that subsequently cause the successful life form to go extinct. At the end of the Permian Period, roughly 252 million years ago, a genus of microbes called Methanosarcina evolved a new way to capture energy (in the form of organic carbon) from the oceans. This proved a huge success, and Methanosarcina multiplied madly. In the process, though, the tiny organisms belched out so much methane that they changed the chemistry of the seas and skies.  Over the next few million years, 96 percent of marine species and 70 percent of terrestrial vertebrates went extinct, and the oceans’ surface temperature may have reached 104°F.
between AD 439 and 600, the city of Rome shrank from about 800,000 people to fewer than 40,000. Over the last two thousand years, at least five societies have pressed against the upper limits of farming economies; four failed to break through, but the experiments kept going, until in the late eighteenth century Northwest Europeans unleashed a fossil-fuel economy
"There must be some way out of here"
Said the joker to the thief
"There's too much confusion
I can't get no relief
The coming decades are likely to challenge much of what we think we know about what progress is, and about who we are in relation to the rest of nature. Advanced technologies will challenge our sense of what it means to be human at the same time [extinction].
I don’t know all of the answers in life, but I do know all of the things which aren’t the answers, and JavaScript falls into the same category as Scientology, homeopathic medicine, and making dogs wear tiny sweaters due to a misplaced belief that this is what dogs would do if they had access to looms and opposable thumbs.
Describing why the Web is horrible is like describing why it’s horrible to drown in an ocean composed of pufferfish that are pregnant with tiny Freddy Kruegers—each detail is horrendous in isolation, but the aggregate sum is delightfully arranged into a hate flower that blooms all year
employs a variety of misdirections and soothing words to obscure the ultimate nature of reality; in this regard, they resemble used car salesmen and Girl Scouts (whose “cookie sales” are merely shell companies for the Yakuza).
few challenges facing civilization during the twenty-first-century will be as daunting, and as critical, as the preservation of the biosphere’s integrity.
